# Spring Boot in Depth

Spring Boot in Depth is a Spring Boot book that intends to be a comprehensive Spring Boot guide covering the latest version of the framework. The book has the following goals:

1. Discuss Spring Boot with an emphasis on the framework internal constructs such as starters, auto-configuration, conditional annotation system. We discuss these in great depth, illustrates their internal workings and usage within the framework. Based on the these knowledge, we build our custom such constructs and use.

2. Discuss various Spring Boot features such as property management, observability support, security, testing and deployment. We intend to demonstrate how various Spring Boot features can be used to build and deploy enterprise Java applications.

The following is a chapter wise summary:

Chapter 1: The book starts with a discussion on what Spring Boot is and how it works. It then scaffolds a Spring Boot project and briefly discusses its various components such as starters, auto-configuration, conditional annotation system. Further, it discuss the dependency management, Spring Boot's opinionated nature and production ready features. Finally this chapter introduces the example application 'QuickPay', a payment orchestrator platform that we'll use throughout in the book to demonstrate various capabilities of Spring Boot.

Chapter 2: This chapter starts on the foundation built on chapter 1 and starts exploring the various building blocks that powers Spring Boot. We start with SpringApplication class, the main orchestrator that bootstraps a Spring Boot application and explore the convention-over-configuration design principle, and how Spring Boot uses it all across the framework. We then briefly discuss auto-configuration and conditional annotation system in further detail with emphasis on their usage on customization aspects. We then discuss Spring Boot's embedded server model, support for range of web servers, their key features and customization techniques. Finally we introduce observability and Spring Boot's extensive support across all observability pillars such as Metrics, Logging, Tracing and Actuator.

Chapter 3:This chapter exclusively focuses on Spring Boot starter framework. We start with the concept of starters and their purpose. We then discuss the anatomy of a starter by understanding their role as build artifacts, how they bundle a set of related libraries designed for the starter and its integration with Spring Boot auto-configuration. Next, we discuss the several Spring Boot official starters such as webmvc (new in Spring Boot 4 and intended to used in place of we starter), data-jpa, security, test and actuator. Based on this knowledge, we develop a custom logging starter for the QuickPay application streamline the use of structured logging across QuickPay modules. We also discuss a decision framework on scenarios where custom starters are useful against ConfigurationProperties or standard libraries. Finally we close the chapter by discussing some best practices on starter usage.

Chapter 4: This chapter discuss the Spring Boot auto-configuration. It starts with an introduction of auto-configuration and the role of @SpringBootApplication and @EnableAutoConfiguration to bootstrap the process. Next, we discuss the auto-configuration flow from its initialization, discovery of auto-configuration classes, filtering, evaluation and the bean registration. We then move to understand the typical structures of an auto-configuration class. Next, we discuss the auto-configuration ordering and how it allows orchestrating multiple auto-configurations to enable a feature. We then discuss some of the official auto-configuration classes and their purpose. We also understand various strategies to influence auto-configuration behavior and some of the techniques to evaluate auto-configuration report. Finally, we develop a custom auto-configuration for the QuickPay application that employs all these concepts.
